Speaker 1  00:21
Thanks so much for popping on a call so quickly I was working on this story. Went to the end burr new paper section as as usual. And I was like, wow, this is, like, very related. Yeah, immediately. So I'll just do a quick round of introductions and housekeeping. I'll try to keep it short. I know you have to go to take your daughter to something. So, yeah. So my name is Jasmine. I'm a reporter for NBC News. I rate move just about the economy. Housing, accessibility, labor, and so here I'm interested in asking the question, can we bring all these jobs back? Like, I guess, like, I personally was like, I don't know what to make of this. This is kind of like a bold goal, and I would like to talk to someone who has answers. So that's why I reached out. And this is my editor, Joe, and yeah, he's here to make sure that I cover all my bases, basically, yeah, and then just before we start, if it's all right, can we record this just so I can take take notes for later? Sure. Yeah. Okay, great. If you could both just introduce yourselves quickly for the record, that'd be great.

Speaker 2  01:49
Okay, I'm Richard Mansfield. I'm an assistant professor of economics at the University of Colorado, Boulder, Professor of a team only in the economic department. Great. Department.

Speaker 1  02:02
Great. Thank you so much. Um, so I guess the big question is like, what do you guys make of of all of all of this, whatever that means, I guess tariffs, what this could do for the labor force? I know you guys are writing about the China shock. This is kind of the reverse of that. And I just like to get your big picture thoughts, like, what does this mean?

Speaker 2  02:24
Sure, I think the first question is, is this actually going to increase labor demand more broadly? And I think it's really not obvious that it will. And I think the argument for it is that maybe this will cause some jobs to be reshored that were previously offshored. Some inputs that we no longer make in America could be made in America. Maybe some product market competition that our US firms face will be weakened in the US market, and they'll sell more visit us consumers. But I also think there's a lot of reasons to be skeptical about that. One reason is that you asked me about manufacturing firms. A lot of the large multinational manufacturing firms that have really large market shares here also have substantial market shares abroad. Most US firms aren't that reliant for revenue on exports. But that's not necessarily true for the big manufacturing firms. They're actually pretty export intensive. One of the things we found in our research is when China dramatically expanded production of manufactured goods back in the early 2000s this this was actually one of the big sources of job loss. It wasn't just that they penetrated the US market. They also penetrated the European markets, the Latin American markets, etc, where the US used to have substantial market shares, and so this is still essentially similar to that. Even though this is sort of a reversal of globalization, it's still a case where US firms are going to become less competitive in export markets, and this is because of the retaliatory retaliatory tariffs that now basically we're going to have to essentially lower the price that we receive in order to hold prices fixed for the consumers abroad. So we're so those firms are going to be squeezed in their export markets, and in addition, a lot of the inputs that they rely on to keep their costs competitive with their foreign competitors are also going to get more expensive due to the import tariffs, so their costs are going to rise, and there's going to be this wedge between the price that they receive and the price that the Consumers in those countries actually pay. So I think in our context, we should find that a good chunk of the manufacturing job loss from the so called china shop, from China expansion of production, actually came from Lost export sales. And you can see this from the fact that the kinds of firms that were disproportionately reliant on. Supporting the kinds of goods where the tariff risk was removed when China joined the WTO, were the ones who disproportionately shed jobs in the years thereafter. And so in addition, even within the domestic market, it's also the case that these import tariffs are going to raise costs for US manufacturers, in some cases, some of these import tariffs might not raise costs as much if we can find other sources for these inputs. So instead of importing these inputs from Canada, from Mexico, from China, we import them from Vietnam, from Chile, etc. That's a scenario where maybe the price impact and the impact on firms profitability of how many, how many products firms are able to produce and sell might not be so severe, but that's also a case where we're not really sure you're in any jobs. So in some sense, its costs aren't rising very much, then that probably means firms don't have much of an incentive to restore these jobs. The flip side, though, is that if costs really do rise, they have more incentive to reshor jobs. That also means that they're going to have to raise prices more, which lowers product demand from the US customers. And it's less obvious that they're going to want to produce as many goods, and if they're not producing as many goods, they're not going to hire as many workers. So in some sense, even if their production becomes more US labor intensive, if the overall production goes down, it might be a larger share of a smaller

Speaker 3  06:33
I think the other part to mention, to all of Rick is saying, is that the fact that it's a lot of uncertainty about the tariff, and the fact that you don't know the tariff going to be here for the next six months or not means that when you are making all these decisions you want to make the decision they are more easily to reverse. Right? So you don't want to be hiring a lot of workers, potentially, you don't want to build a big plan. You want to do a bunch of things. You may just to find a way to serve your consumers, or maybe take more profit by just adjusting some other things. We could say. One of the options will be just buying from other countries. Another option will be just rising prices, having shorter increasing profits, and then just take the windfall, because you don't know that we're here. You don't want to be in the plan that have to be active for the next 10 or 15 years in order to be profitable for the long run, right? And I think the fact that the administration has been pretty explicit that part of the goal of these tariffs is to extract concessions from other companies about how they handle drug trade or migrants or whatever, strongly suggests that some of these tariffs could disappear if those concessions were granted, but that immediately suggests that maybe firms should be expanding rapidly their labor force to restore all these inputs if the only reason they were doing this was because they had temporary competitive advantage in the US market, because all of their competitors now had to face import tariffs.

Speaker 1  08:12
Yeah, no, the policy landscape piece is interesting. Thank you for that, I guess, like pie in the sky, like, what could make restoring happen. It seems like sometimes tariffs have some kind of, maybe like positive effects, like with solar panels, perhaps with semiconductors, like some people have suggested, Why does it seem like some of these maybe work and then others not as much, like with the kind of, like steel tariffs in 2018 and a lot of what happened with China, I guess I think if you had some, yeah,

Speaker 2  08:45
I mean, I think our research speaks less strongly to this. But one way of thinking about this is that there are some products where we already have a reasonable market share. We already know how to produce these things. There are firms that know how to do this. They are already hiring. They know how to do hiring in the United States, and now their competitors that also have a substantial market share are facing higher tariffs. They might be in a better position to expand. I think it might be a little harder for industries where we barely even have a foothold, where we're not even close to being competitive, in industries where I guess we're really reliant on foreign inputs to produce the products. So if we have some industries where, basically, we already produce most of the products at home, but we only have a limited market share because we also import a bunch of finished products from abroad, those might be goods where it's not quite a reshoring effect, but in some sense, we already know how to produce these inputs, and now we can expand production, because we're going to reclaim some of the market share in the US, domestic market that's currently going to import goods. I think the other part here about what we could say is that sometimes there is complementarity also to do. Shooting workers and inputs, so that also affect when you would expect to hire a lot of workers or not. So, for example, in very capital intensive industries, right? Like still, you may not move a car like an industry, because suddenly you have higher tariffs, coming back to the types of uncertainty, because then we have a lot of cost to set up a plan, and it's going to take a long time to recoup that investment. In some other cases, maybe easier to do that, because this, we have a more big demand here, because if you think about also, right, still, we are no consumer who buys you. We all buy processed steel in our lives. However, some empires we do have the final call to review. You can also think about that that might matter when you are thinking about which industry may be more willing to resell in the US,

Speaker 3  10:56
yeah, some of them can resell their equipment to other firms more easily, which makes them more willing to invest in the first place, even if they think that the product demand run might get pulled out from everything. Go ahead. 

Speaker 1  11:09
I was just wondering, like, so like, what sectors do you think might benefit the most, or, or be heard the most?

Speaker 2  11:20
Like, based on what like, I think like, you have to give us a little bit more context for me, at least, to answer that question, carbon, also the current tariff,

Speaker 1  11:31
yeah, yeah, like the ones that have been levied on, like the Canada, China and Mexico. So like, like, with, with the automobile industry. The question is, like, Will this bring like, American auto back? I'm just wondering.

Speaker 2  11:45
I feel like the ones we're going to be more harsh, more generally, and the ones have their supply chain more fragmented in multiple steps between Canada and Mexico. And the reason for that is because then the goods are crossing the border multiple times, because before there was no target, moving the good from Colorado to you to California, back and forth. And then it's easy to try to create and take a bunch of the columns and scales and move things from Canada, Mexico, the US, back and forth. But now, in a 25% higher every time you move the good, if the good cross three times between camel and Mexico and the US. Now you are not paying just a 25 percentile. If you are paying 25 over the first time, then 25 plus the first time they cross, and you are jumping all even more 25 then the third time across is another 25 right? So then industry that have more fragmented and across the world on multiple times between Canada, US and Mexico are the ones going to be more firm from these tariffs. One example of that could be the auto industry, who has basically plants all over the North America. Another one could be some food that goes back and forth between different countries. And I don't know details about enough about different industries, but that's the one of the fact that one effect.

Speaker 2  13:16
I mean, if you want to have some appliances, one you have to have sectors. But I think another way to think another way to think about this is that maybe some small firms would benefit expensive at the expense of large firms. At the large firms have managed to get a cost advantage through these complicated international supply chains, and now those supply chains have become more expensive to manage for the reasons that Geronimo said, and a lot of the small domestic companies don't use those kinds of complicated supply chains for their inputs, or they make some of them themselves, then maybe they might be able to reclaim a little bit of market share. So this might actually be sort of within sector reallocation, if you think about that. And I guess one point I wanted to make earlier when you sent us the email with some of the prompts you were asking a manufacturing firm specifically, but I actually think part of what we learned from our research that we didn't know beforehand was just how sensitive some of the other industries are to these kinds of international trade shocks. Among other things, we found that a lot of the job destruction in manufacturing from the early wave of China expanding its exports was offsite, at least in terms of job counts by expansion in the wholesale retail industries, basically the people who are doing the importing and the people who are selling the imported goods. But the flip side of that is that when you impose these tariffs now, now you have dramatically raised their the costs of getting the imported goods and selling them to consumers, and so there may be some jobs and basically the wholesale and retail industries that are actually at risk as a result of these tariffs. The other thing we found is that. Are a lot of firms that aren't technically classified as manufacturing that still run some manufacturing establishments. Think about sort of IBM in the early days when they started to move into consulting more than production, but they were still producing some goods. We actually found that they the professional business services industry actually does a lot of they have some of those establishments are actually part of manufacturing firms. And likewise, there's some manufacturing for establishments that are part of mostly firms and professional business services. And they're some of the big exporters as well. They're some of the ones at risk from retaliatory tariffs. So I think the idea that this is so manufacturing centric, or even agriculture centric, is actually missing some of the broader story. There's more trade exposure and has previously been appreciated.

Speaker 1  15:49
Yeah, that was one part of your paper that I found interesting, that it like bleeds outside of, like, the direct like, like, what you I guess, like the direct zone of impact. That was interesting. Another, sorry, I guess, like, another thing that I found interesting was this idea that, like, Where do people go? Like, when these jobs are missing? Like, I see you guys talk about competition, and then how some people are out competed, and then they move into, like, service sector jobs, they go elsewhere. So it seems like there's some reorganization in the labor force that's happened. Where would the labor like come from if we were to

Speaker 2  16:29
in factories? And I think we have a lot to say about that. I think one of the first things to realize is that manufacturing hires frequently come from lots of other industries. They actually don't hire all that much directly from kind of long term unemployed people. You know who hires long term unemployed people? It's kind of leisure and hospitality, it's hotels, it's food, it's retail companies, manufacturing companies don't tend to hire unemployed workers all that often. They tend to hire workers from other firms. What kinds of industries do they hire from very DISPRO, I mean, very disproportionately, sort of administrative, waste management stuff. Can you think about these as temp workers? To some extent, they hire a lot of construction workers, particularly relative to the size of the construction sector. They help. They hire a lot of workers from the wholesale industry. They hire at the higher end, it's sort of the more management or technical side of things. They hire a lot from sort of professional technical services.

Speaker 3  17:34
And they also hire from other mental factors too. So basically, think about like a worker. All the workers who get hired manufacturing also come from another manufacturing firm. So if you're thinking about expanding, then it's going to be also an increased competition for workers within the sector.

Speaker 2 17:53
Yeah. So some firms that were never that were in manufacturing, firms that weren't actually all that engaged with trade might end up kind of losing some of their workers to firms that are now expanding, even if they have better protection from tariffs, and they might be inclined to hire some workers, and they might have a slightly different composition of the kinds of workers they hire. I should say that in some sense, manufacturing does less hiring than some other industries precisely because they have such low turnover. So one of the other questions you asked is like, well, will US workers want these jobs? I'm more dubious about whether those jobs will actually materialize for all the reasons that I suggested before. But if you want to know whether these are going to be good jobs, I think our research suggested they probably will be at least if the nature manufacturing hasn't changed too much in the last 510, years, etc, but these basically were historically really high or really low turnover jobs, really high retention rate jobs, but 80% of people kept their job from one year to the next. That's compared to, I don't know, somewhere in the 60 to 70 range for things like leisure and hospitality and wholesale and retail and such. So they're either not quite as stable as government jobs, but it's almost the next most stable job. And so one way to think about this is that, what kinds of jobs have low turnover rates? Well, it's one sort of evidence, first of all, that you're not not that likely to get fired. But also that means that workers are not voluntarily leaving for other kinds of jobs, which is kind of a Revealed Preference way of suggesting that these are high quality job but people don't want to leave. So I do think actually that historically, manufacturing jobs have been fairly high quality. They have been fairly stable. And I think one of the reasons for that is that is that in order to make somebody productive in manufacturing, we generally have to train them, which is partly why Ron was statements before. But tariff uncertainty is a big deal. They don't want to invest in training workers that they're then not going to be able to use if the tariffs get rolled back. But the flip side of that is because it takes time to to. Train workers. Once these workers are trained, these manufacturing firms don't really want to let them go unless they're really about to go to business. Even if their demand declines a little bit, they're more likely to just stop hiring, lose some retirees, for example, rather than lay off their existing workers. So I do actually think these are likely to be sort of stable jobs that people are reluctant to

Speaker 1  20:23
leave, interesting, yeah. Like, I guess for me, my naive thought was, like, if someone wanted me to go, like, into farming or something, it would take a while before I could jump on, like a combine harvester, like that would which brings me to my next question, like, how long would it take to re skill and, like, rebuild these sectors? Like, given what your research has has shown,

Speaker 2  20:44
I think the paper that you saw doesn't have much to say about that. I think some of Coronavirus, previous research on responses to tariff uncertainty, matters a bit more, a little bit

Speaker 3  20:55
yeah. So I think the question there is that, how long, how things, how Finn thinks about the the transcript, in nature of these tariffs, if they are going to be short lived, then, you know, see, a lot of new hires and films are going to try to avoid that. If you think that these are going to be more permanent, and that's going to be the shape of the US trade policy, and then when we really make a lot of protections, then Finns may decide to invest on this, and then it's just more like a labor market question, How long until workers get trained? Usually, like, I think Rick use a labor economy be better to explain that based on literature. But in general, expect to hire more like younger workers who are easy to train, and they get used to the new characteristic of the jobs. Lancaster try to hire people from other sectors, from other experience, or more experienced people who you need to be trained. I don't know whether you have

Speaker 2  22:00
Yeah. I mean, so, you know, just to summarize, one way to ask, How long will it take to rebuild and retrain the workforce is, how long will it take firms to be convinced that it's actually worth starting up in these industries that are getting protected if they think these are temporaries? I think that might actually be the biggest thing is that they won't even start trying to hire and train people until they're convinced that these are permanent tax but then even once, those are permanent tariffs. You know, one way to think about this, it doesn't take that long for vacancies to get filled. I mean, even in sectors like manufacturing, take a little bit more time. It's still usually just a couple months for the typical vacancy to get filled. It doesn't take that long to hire workers, per se, if you already have kind of the managers who know how to assemble the products. So in some sense, for the kinds of firms that are already producing products and have the know how and now potentially can claim a larger market share because their foreign competitors are facing import tariffs, I don't think it would take them that long to expand their operation. It's very different if you're thinking about bringing industries back that have almost entirely disappeared. And I think you know, one, one industry that you could imagine, one example of this that we can kind of learn from the pandemic was when we had to make mass masks again for the first time. And basically, it turned out that almost none of the machinery, from what I gather, even exists in the US anymore. And all these manufacturers were scrambling to basically get Chinese firms to send them the machinery that actually builds masks. And so we just had almost no domestic know how for how to compete in that industry. And so even so, some of these tariffs, you can imagine, if they are going to actually engender entrepreneurs to go into a business that didn't exist before. Those are the ones that are going to take a long time, because we need to even retrain kind of the managers and the means of production Foreman before we can start going downstream and training the kind of lower level workers who are doing the assembly along tasks, etc.

Speaker 1  24:02
Hmm. Okay. So my last question is, like, do we want to be manufacturing heavy? Like, is this something that we want to like when, from the data that I've looked at, like, there are countries like Suriname that, like, 26% of their GDP comes from manufacturing. But when you but it seems that like, as countries grow wealthier, they try to move, like, higher up in the value chain and move towards this. And I was wondering, like, what, what your take? Is there? Like, is this something that we want to reallocate, like, labor and resources to? Or, I mean, I don't know the answer, but yeah, like, is this, is this a good thing to go pursue?

Speaker 2  24:36
Yeah, and I think it's a hard and complicated question, and I'm not sure I know myself what I think about this, but I mean, one way to think about this is that it is valuable to have to be competitive in products that other countries want to buy that actually allows us to be able to bring in to generate the wealth that allows us to. Buy imported goods and get access to other countries natural resources, and we can exchange them for some of our manufactured goods. So in principle, if you could actually protect these industries long enough to make them internationally competitive, I do think that could be a source of wealth, but that's, you know, it's an optimistic scenario, but that's sort of what China did with solar panels, I think, was that they protected their industries and they subsidized their industries for long enough that they actually got good at making these things, and now it's a big source of wealth for them. So it's not like this couldn't happen.

Speaker 3  25:34
Yeah, and I was just, I wanted to add two additional things there. First of all is that now in the current global economy, you can also export services. In the past, exporting services was rare and difficult to get access to foreign goods or food services, but now you can do and the US is actually pretty competitive in exports of services, so the US has a deficit in goods, but it has a super rabbit in in services. So the US as an economy is well developed, so a lot of, like the big share of the GDP, is in services, but they also export more services than they import, which could be a replacement for these manufacturing industries. The second part is that manufacturing is not necessarily the most clean industry. So you want to keep in mind that when you are bringing some of these industries, you can come come with additional costs. We are relevant for the society. So there are a number of papers which shows that, like cities around or housing around like manufacturing plant, they have a lot of additional pollution, noise and things that affect people who live around there. So when you are thinking about whether we want these jobs, we need to think about roughly about what are the benefits and also the spillovers that we find. One of them is environmental, and other ones are also potential. Positive is like, again, the pandemic shows us sometimes having domestic production matter for making sure that good access to the things that you care. So having more diverse conversation could be useful for that. But if you think about growth, it's not clear the child pushing on tariffs to create that growth is a solution that really can be effective. It can in some cases, but it's not a more guaranteed solution. And there is also the story about an issue about dimension of these, these sectors, media, location, that will matter solution like also reshaping, also the states right demands, because services usually are more mobile than manufacturing, so manufacturing location would matter more where they you can have services, especially right now. We work from home. People can move around and distribute the shop more broadly across the whole US, while manufacturing usually requires plants. You can access to land, you can access to other markets and move goods around. So you can think about that it's going to be affecting very differentially, different states, different states.

Speaker 2  28:32
I think that one of the downsides of trying to re establish manufacturing this way, even if it generated some growth to the extent that all these tariffs are kind of undermining goodwill toward America. I mean, a lot of the services we export, they might be things like entertainment that people are no longer going to be inclined they're going to try to boycott us entertainment. But I think maybe even a more prominent example, it doesn't even show up in the export statistics. I think one of the big things we've exported up until recently, was education. People came here to get their education, and then they left. And because these aren't good exports, no one's getting customs no one's paying customs bills on these things. They're not entering customs records. It's not really counted as a service that we're exporting. But we had tons of Chinese students coming to all of our universities over the last 1015, years, and some of that's starting to dry up, and that's basically international money that's coming into the US and generating us wealth. And so that's kind of one way to in which service growth could actually be reversed by these kinds of policies.

Speaker 1  29:37
Interesting. I think that's about it for me. Thank you so much for your time, Joe, do you have anything

Speaker 3  29:42
I do not. This has been great. Thank you.

Speaker 1  29:45
Thank you so much, and I'll send you the story when it's out. Yeah, I appreciate that.

Speaker 3  29:49
Okay, thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
